Marvel Cinematic Universe Tie-In Comics

The Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) tie-in comic books are limited series or one-shot comics published by Marvel Comics that tie into the films and television series of the MCU. The comics are written and illustrated by a variety of individuals, and each one consists of 1 to 4 issues. They are intended to tell additional stories about existing characters, or to make connections between MCU projects, without necessarily expanding the universe or introducing new concepts or characters.

The first MCU tie-in comics to be published were Iron Man: Fast Friends, The Incredible Hulk: The Fury Files, and Nick Fury: Spies Like Us, all in 2008. They were followed by an adaptation of Iron Man in 2010, along with Iron Man 2: Fist of Iron (2010), Iron Man 2: Public Identity (2010), Iron Man 2: Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (2010), Captain America: First Vengeance (2011), Captain America & Thor: Avengers (2011), The Avengers Prelude: Fury's Big Week (2012), The Avengers Initiative (2012), The Avengers Prelude: Black Widow Strikes (2012), and an adaptation of Iron Man 2 (2012). Comic tie-ins for Marvel's television series began in 2014 with Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Chase, followed by Jessica Jones (2015).

Marvel changed its approach to film tie-in material in 2012, retroactively dividing the tie-in comics into those that exist within the MCU continuity, and those that are merely inspired by the films and television series. Since then, Iron Man 3 Prelude (2013), Thor: The Dark World Prelude (2013), Captain America: The Winter Soldier Infinite Comic (2014), Guardians of the Galaxy Infinite Comic (2014), Guardians of the Galaxy Prelude (2014), Avengers: Age of Ultron Prelude – This Scepter'd Isle (2015), Ant-Man Prelude (2015), Ant-Man – Scott Lang: Small Time (2015), Captain America: Civil War Prelude Infinite Comic (2016), Doctor Strange Prelude (2016), Doctor Strange Prelude Infinite Comic (2016), Black Panther Prelude (2017), and Avengers: Infinity War Prelude (2018) have been released in the former category, along with film adaptations of Thor (2013), Captain America: The First Avenger (2013), The Avengers (2014–15), Iron Man 3 and Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2015–16), Guardians of the Galaxy (2017), Captain America: Civil War (2017), The Incredible Hulk (2017), Thor: The Dark World (2017), Ant-Man (2018), and Avengers: Infinity War (2018–19).

Development

In 2008, Marvel released Iron Man: Fast Friends, a comic prequel to Iron Man, for which writer Paul Tobin was given a broad outline and some "temporal staging" so as to allow the comic to tie into the film. Later that year, The Incredible Hulk: Fury Files, which serves as a prequel to The Incredible Hulk, was released, detailing an encounter between the Hulk and Nick Fury, characters who had not yet been seen together in the MCU. Writer Frank Tieri noted that the tie-in comics "provide Marvel with the opportunity to do a lot of different things" that other media do not, including the exploration of non-superhero genres and the reintroduction of older characters.

Alejandro Arbona, the Marvel editor tasked with overseeing the 2010 tie-in comics Iron Man 2: Public Identity and Iron Man 2: Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., explained that Marvel "want to show readers more of that world, that connective tissue between all the movies, and a little bit more of how the characters interact", so the publishing side worked with Brad Winderbaum, Jeremy Latcham, and Will Corona Pilgrim at Marvel Studios to decide which concepts should be carried over from the Marvel Comics Universe to the Marvel Cinematic Universe, what to show in the tie-in comics and what to leave for the films, and how to "make these stories as strong as possible" from their experience making the films.

"The MCU [comics] are going to be stories set within movie continuity. [They are] not necessarily direct adaptations of the movies, but maybe something that happened off screen and was mentioned in the movie...[Marvel Studios chief] Kevin Feige is involved with these and in some cases maybe the writers of the movies would be involved [as well.]"

—Marvel Comics editor-in-chief Joe Quesada outlining his plan for the MCU comic books in November 2010.

For Marvel's The Avengers in 2012, Marvel's senior vice-president of sales David Gabriel described a "more focused" approach to tie-ins than previously, with the intention to reach fans of 'all walks of life'. This was echoed by Rich Thomas, global editorial director at Disney Publishing, who wanted the Avengers program to be "all things to all people. Just like the film, from the youngest reader...to the Marvel enthusiast."Since then, many of the tie-ins have had the red 'Avengers' stamp on the cover. Pilgrim, the creative director of research and development at Marvel Studios, confirmed that the previously released Public Identity, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and First Vengeance, were all official MCU stories, with the other previously released tie-in comics considered to be inspired by the MCU only.

Comic writer Fred Van Lente stated in 2013 that he had proposed a regular comic series set within the MCU to Marvel, but they wished to keep all possibilities open for potential film and television development. He said that this was also the reason why Marvel does not want writers to introduce new elements to the MCU through tie-in comics. In March 2014, Pilgrim confirmed that the MCU Infinite Comics were officially canon. That July, the MCU tie-in comics expanded to television tie-ins with the release of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Chase, a comic inspired by the first season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. In November, Marvel Comics Editor-in-Chief Axel Alonso avoided a question of whether an ongoing comic series could be set within the MCU, but did note that Marvel Comics would "always be working on books set in the Cinematic Universe...the collected editions of those comics end up being some of the best sellers of the year".

In February 2015, Pilgrim clarified that the canon tie-ins "are considered official MCU canon stories" set in the same universe as the films and television series, whereas the other, "inspired by" tie-ins are "more about having another fun adventure with the Avengers....where we get to show off all the characters from the film in costume and in comic form", but not affect the official MCU continuity.

"When we started launching Marvel Studios and decided these movies were interconnected...we wanted to make sure it made sense as a cohesive, whole piece, [which] really sort of freed us up to start asking what other stories would we like to tell....anything that we really loved but didn't necessarily have a place in the film[s] is fair game."

— Captain America: The First Avenger co-producer Stephen Broussard in February 2011, on the conception of the tie-in comics.

Adaptations

Several comics adapting the story of the films have been released: Iron Man: I Am Iron Man!, an adaptation of Iron Man; Marvel's Iron Man 2, an adaptation of Iron Man 2; Marvel's Thor, an adaptation of Thor; Marvel's Captain America: The First Avenger, an adaptation of Captain America: The First Avenger; Marvel's The Avengers, an adaptation of The Avengers; Marvel's Captain America: Civil War Prelude, an adaptation of both Iron Man 3 and Captain America: The Winter Soldier; Marvel's Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 Prelude, an adaptation of Guardians of the Galaxy, Spider-Man: Homecoming Prelude, an adaptation of Captain America: Civil War; Marvel's Thor: Ragnarok Prelude, an adaptation of both The Incredible Hulk and Thor: The Dark World, Marvel's Ant-Man and the Wasp Prelude, an adaptation of Ant-Man, Marvel's Avengers: Endgame Prelude, an adaptation of Avengers: Infinity War, and Spider-Man: Far From Home Prelude, an adaptation of Spider-Man: Homecoming.

In January 2015, Pilgrim explained the process for adapting films into tie-in comics, noting that scripts and other behind-the-scenes material are referenced in addition to the actual films. Because of this, the adaptations sometimes have new scenes, which Marvel "felt strongly enough" to include as canon, even though they were never filmed. Examples include an interaction between Jasper Sitwell and Nick Fury in Iron Man: I Am Iron Man!, the "Boys Flight Out" sequence from Iron Man 2, where Tony Stark invites James Rhodes to wear the Iron Man Mark II armor, and an additional interaction set during Captain America: Civil War between Peter Parker and his Aunt May in Spider-Man: Homecoming Prelude.

Reoccurring Characters

Phil Coulson
Nick Fury
Steve Rogers (Captain America)
James "Rhodey" Rhoads (War Machine)
Natasha Romanoff (Black Widow)
Tony Stark (Iron Man)
Thor

MCU Comics in Order by Release

Adaptations
Iron Man 2: Public Identity (2010)
Iron Man 2: Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (2010)
Captain America: First Vengeance (2011)
Marvel's The Avengers Prelude: Fury's Big Week (2012)
Marvel's The Avengers: Black Widow Strikes (2012)
Marvel's Iron Man 3 Prelude (2013)
Marvel's Thor: The Dark World Prelude (2013)
Marvel's Captain America: The Winter Soldier Infinite Comic (2014)
Marvel's Guardians of the Galaxy Infinite Comic – Dangerous Prey (2014)
Marvel's Guardians of the Galaxy Prelude (2014)
Marvel's Avengers: Age of Ultron Prelude – This Scepter'd Isle (2015)
Marvel's Ant-Man Prelude (2015)
Marvel's Ant-Man – Scott Lang: Small Time (2015)
Marvel's Jessica Jones (2015)
Marvel's Captain America: Civil War Prelude Infinite Comic – Crossroads (2016)
Marvel's Doctor Strange Prelude (2016)
Marvel's Doctor Strange Prelude Infinite Comic – The Zealot (2016)
Marvel's Black Panther Prelude (2017)
Marvel's Avengers: Infinity War Prelude (2018)
Marvel's Captain Marvel Prelude (2018)
Marvel's Black Widow Prelude (2020)
